A woman hangs her laundry outside her shack in the Alexandra township of Johannesburg. Photo:  Alexander Joe/AFP South African President Cyril Ramaphosa recently brought his election campaign to Alexandra, after a week of protests about service delivery in the township. The country is set to hold national elections on 8 May 2019. The protests were widely covered by the media, as was Ramaphosa’s speech to angry residents. “We have built more than 4 million houses and, here in Alexandra, I want you to know we are still going to build houses so our people can get houses,” Ramaphosa told the crowd. A number of news outlets reported that he “promised to build a million houses for the residents of Alexandra”. Has the government built more than 4 million houses? And did Ramaphosa promise to build 1 million in Alexandra? We checked. “We have built more than 4 million houses.” The latest housing statistics show that Ramaphosa’s claim is incorrect. According to the department of human settlements, 3.3 million houses or “housing units” were built from the 1994/95 financial year to December 2018. These include subsidised houses, rental accommodation, hostel upgrades and council houses where ownership was granted, departmental spokesperson Xolani Xundu previously told Africa Check. Source: Department of human settlements Almost 1.2 million “serviced sites” were delivered in the same period. These are plots of land supplied with water, electricity and sanitation. Nearly 370,000 units were also provided under the Enhanced Extended Discount Benefit Scheme (EEDBS). This scheme “provides state subsidies to repair and/or rehabilitate and even demolish and rebuild, where necessary, government rental houses built before 1994 and then transfer houses into the ownership of legitimate occupants”. In total, the government has provided 4.8 million housing opportunities. But the statistics have not been independently verified. A housing expert previously told Africa Check that they should be “read with caution, as indicative rather than entirely conclusive”. Ramaphosa promised to build 1 million houses in Alexandra A number of news outlets reported that Ramaphosa promised to build 1 million houses in Alexandra. A recording of his speech shows this is incorrect. Ramaphosa’s speech was carried live on SABC news, the country’s public broadcaster. At around the 20 minute mark he starts talking about housing. “I am here with our minister of human settlements and, listen carefully, they have a programme for the whole of South Africa to build 1 million houses,” he said. “One million houses will be built and, here in Alexandra, we will look into the issue of land so that when we build houses we build them in the correct manner.” Ramaphosa has since tweeted about the misreporting, saying it was a “huge distortion”. His tweet reads: “The ANC government intends to build 1 million over the next 5 years throughout the country. Every province will be given a target that they must meet. This is something that I would like to see and it is possible.” Africa Check asked the department of human settlements if they had a plan to build 1 million houses over the next five years. But the department’s spokesperson would not say if there was an official programme. “If the president says we are going to build a million houses, we are going to build a million houses,” said Xundu. “It sounds like an instruction to the department.” Director of research and advocacy at the Socio-Economic Rights Institute, Alana Potter, told Africa Check that the goal was ambitious. “Looking back on our track record over the last 25 years… to do a million seems like quite a big ask,” she said. “It would require a really rapid land release programme so they’d really need to move fast to get that happening.” The construction of houses peaked in 1998/98 when 235,635 units were built. Delivery has declined significantly since then, with just 86,006 units built in 2017/18. No government administration has managed to build 1 million houses during their five-year term. The highest number of houses was built from 1999/2000 to 2003/04. Source: Department of human settlements *Note: 2018/19 figures are for April to December 2018. We have determined what Ramaphosa said to the residents of Alexandra. But it’s not possible to fact-check if 1 million houses will be built – we’re not fortune tellers. Africa Check will log this commitment on our Promise Tracker. We’ll follow housing delivery in South Africa for the next five years and let you know if Ramaphosa keeps or breaks his promise. Additional reading Frequently asked questions about housing in South Africa No evidence for SA government’s ‘truly amazing’ house delivery rate Minister Sisulu is right – SA’s housing delivery has almost halved since 2006/07  Previous report Uncertain Nigeria population data makes claim about stunted kids hard to verify   © Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page. 